+++
title = "Advent of Code 2019"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Rust", "AOC", "Advent-of-Code"]
+++
# Advent of Code
This post is about 10 months late, but I wanted to note on the blog that I solved the
[2019 advent of code](https://adventofcode.com/) problems
[using Rust](https://github.com/nsmryan/advent_of_code_2019). I am fairly
proud of myself for solving all 25 problems- I was luckly enough to have extra
time I didn't expect due to changing plans, and I managed to catch up after starting
fairly late. Ultimately I had to solve the last problem after the 25th, but I solved
them none-the-less.


I enjoyed doing this kind of informal programming in Rust, my current goto language for
hobby stuff. I used to do programming competitions in college, and the AoC problems
are very simple, but more interesting an sophisticated. You read in some file, perhaps
a map or instructions for a machine, and generate an output that matches the judge.
Its throwaway code and just exercised your problem solving and knowledge base- you
have to take out your toolbox of algorithms, language, libraries, etc to get the
job done. Good stuff.


I also learned some things about Advent of Code problems, like to inspect the
specific problem description and your given file in case there are simplifications
that can be applied. I wrote some unncessarily general solutions to some problems, only
later realizing that I was making things much to hard on myself.


My only other note on this was that I recall making some interesting use of A-Star in one of
the problems. It was interesting in that I recall two levels of search- searching for solutions,
and using search to generate solutions. This was the most abstract use of A-star I can remember,
and it was fun to apply this kind of knowledge in a way that was novel for me.


Overall, I enjoyed Advent of Code 2019 a great deal, and I hope to start earlier and try to
keep up this year!
