+++
title = "Advent of Code 2020"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Aoc", "Programming", "AdventOfCode"]
+++
I am doing [Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/) again this year!


My code is [available](https://github.com/nsmryan/aoc2020) if your interested.
I'm intending to use multiple languages this year (last year it was all Rust all
the time).


*edit* I finished all 25 days! In order of how much I used each language,
it was Python, Rust, TCL, C, Forth.

I found this year to be easier overall then last year- there were some days
I had trouble with for sure, but overall I didn't spend nearly as much time
solving this year's puzzles. I ended up implementing some matching code,
a couple simple constraint propagation systems, infix expression parsing,
normal stuff.


## Language Notes
I found that I wanted to use Rust when there was something to model-
directions, instructions, etc. Algebraic data feel very natural to me, and
decompose problems into smaller concepts each of which can be decomposed
further until they are trivial. I missed this in Python and TCL this year, and
I refuse to encode sum types in OOP in Python.

For Python, I used it when there was a lot of datastructure manipulation (lists
of dictionaries of sets of lists...).  Python ended up being fast enough for my
solutions, with occasional optimizations (mostly using sets or dicts instead of
lists). Python is quick to set things up, easy to manipulate structures, and
does not help you if you can't remember what your structures should look like.

For TCL, I just had some with it. It has some nice built-in functions,
it is sometimes trivially able to parse puzzle input due to the way it
handles strings, and I sometimes enjoy writing in its style 
where each action is a nicely composable command. Its doesn't seem
as nice for complex data structures, and certainly not for modeling,
but its got its own sweet spot.


## Days
*SPOLIERS* there are some minor spoilers to certain days in this section!

### Day 1
I had some thoughts about the different language implementations.


In terms of lines of code (language: part 1/part 2):

    * Python: 10/11
    * TCL: 12/16
    * Forth: 25/28
    * Rust: 26/28
    * C: 45/50

I didn't do any extensive performance analysis, but I found that all languages except C
where around 200 ms, and C was about 10 times faster.


This is a little surprising, since Rust should be about as fast as C. I added some 
timers and found that while the program itself is very fast (~2ms actual runtime), the
Rust program seems to load up slowly (perhaps linking)?
I don't know the full story there, except that
the actual calculation is not what is taking the time here.

### 8 Handheld Halting
I was excited to see an instruction set, and I hoped that this would be a running
thing throughout the rest of the days. I was a little disappointed that this 
didn't turn out to be true. Not a big deal, but this was a fun part of 2019's puzzles,
and I believe other years as well.


### 20 Jigsaw
I thought day 20 was perhaps the most inspired puzzle this year. It was fun to manipulate
the images and stitch them together. I probably spent the most time to get this to happen,
and the constraint solving required some optimization, and overall I had fun
with the puzzle.


### 24 Lobby Layout - My Favorite Day 
I think my favorite day was the hex tile puzzle. I considered actually writing a
hex tile data structure and all that, but ended up doing something a little bit
interesting.



I know just enough abstract alegra that I was able to determine some laws that
movements in a hex grid follow (although I didn't think of all the laws in the
first pass). With these laws I was able to reduce each set of directions into
a 'normal form' that is independent of the order of directions, and removes
redundencies like east then west, etc.


This did work, but it was more awkward then necessary. For part 2 I realized
that the hex grid positions could be represented as a pair of integers, and
directions could be translated into an offset for each number in the pair,
so that a movement is just a component-wise sum, and a series of movements
can be turned into a position with the 'reduce' (aka fold) function.


The actual puzzle requires a Conway's game of life style ruleset, so I just
represented the black tiles as an integer pair, and found adjecent tiles by
applying the 6 directions (translated into offsets to this pair). This
turned out to be quite easy, and the whole solution is 59 lines (according to
CLOC).


Ultimately this made me feel clever, so I remembered this as a good day.


## Image Viewer
The one other thing to note is that in preparation for AoC this year I wrote a little
image viewer for pgm images in TCL, which uses Tk to display frames at a given rate.
The idea is that whatever language I'm using, I can output a pgm image with multiple
frames visualizing something I might want to see, and then view them with my TCL
program. It was fairly straightforward to write, and runs with a simple tclkit
making it very portable and reproducible.

*edit* I never even used this program! I ended up adapting it for use at work,
but there was no processor to develop or game to play this year! Oh well,
I enjoyed writing the viewer anyway.

## Next Year
A thought I had for next year would be to consider using libraries for things like
language grammars or constraint solving. Its fun to implement them oneself, but if
its something I've done a few times before, it would be interesting to learn
a new library or how to express a problem in constraints as a way to keep things
interesting. 

