+++
title = "Make2Ninja - Convert a Make Build to a Ninja Builds"
[taxonomies]
categories = ["make", "ninja", "c", "build", "tool", "speed", "python"]
+++
I recently had the desire to speed up a build for a medium sized C program
which uses a make build system. I had previously used CMake for this project,
but had moved back to Make for reasons I may explore in a different post.  One
takeway I had from using CMake was that generating a Ninja build did result in
a significant speedup, so I wanted to see if I could replicate this speed with
my make system.


I looked around for ways to convert a make build into a ninja build, and
surprisingly I could not find a tool for this. It seems like something people
would be interested in, given the large existing makefiles that exist, and I
thought perhaps this doesn't work, or perhaps make doesn't support the
necessary output to construct the ninja build.


It still might be true that there is a fundemental reason that this is a bad
idea, but it does work- you can convert a particular make build into a ninja
build, "freezing" the make configuration into a single solution that can be
quickly repeated using ninja.


## The Concept
I did have a hard time figuring out how to get make to actually print out
its dependency graph with the commands that generate the leaves,
but the project [make2graph](https://github.com/lindenb/makefile2graph)
showed me the command:
```bash
make -Bnd
````
which generates a text discription of the build with dependency information (at
least a topological sort of the dependency graph, which is all I needed), along
with the commands.


Using this output, I wrote a terrible little Python script called make2ninja
which generates a simple build.ninja file based on the results. It is used as
follows:
```bash
make -Bnd | python make2ninja.py > build.ninja
```


## The Result
This creates a 10% improvement in full-rebuilds, and a 30% improvement when
rebuilding a single file change.  I'm perfectly happy with this, but I expect
it could even be better- my makefile was designed to keep a very flat
dependency graph and build the entire program in a single file (no recursive
make)- other, more complex, makefiles might benefit even more.


The limiting factor for me is mostly the building itself, where both make and
ninja seem to make good use of parellelism, and the long final linking step
which takes a non-trivial amount of the total time, especially for small
changes.


I also think that the make2ninja tool could be improved quite a bit, and with
not all that much work, but expressing the entire dependency graph instead of
make's topological soft of the graph- I expect without proof that this could
help ninja with parallelism, and that it could be recovered from the
'make -Bnd' output. If I use this tool on other programs I may one day
get around to this, but for now it is good enough.


## The Conclusion
I would be interested to know if there are situations that make2ninja does not
handle- given the complexity of make I would be surprised if I had not missed
anything.

I also think there are some real improvements that are possible to make2ninja,
like handling .d files for C/C++.

For now though I'm pretty happy that this experiment worked, and that it does
result in an improvement.

